[ACP-77] Message and transaction specification updates and regrouping (#149)
avalanche-foundation/ACPs: ACPs/77-reinventing-subnets/README.md

## Specification

> At a high-level, Subnets will now be able to manage their validator sets external to the P-Chain by setting the blockchain ID and address of their "validator manager". This validator manager is able to send Avalanche Warp Messages to the P-Chain in order to modify the validator set registered for the Subnet. In response, the P-Chain will send Avalanche Warp Message back to validator managers to notify them of validator set changes that have taken effect. Subnet Validators will no longer be required to validate the Primary Network, which removes the requirement to stake 2000 $AVAX to be a Subnet Validator. Further, Subnet Validators will only be required to sync the P-Chain (not X/C-Chain) in order to track validator set changes and support cross-Subnet communication. To maintain a Subnet Validator on the P-Chain, a continuous fee must be paid in $AVAX as specified later in this ACP.

Reviewer: nit: why is Validator capitalized in some places but not others, is it solely for "Subnet Validators"?

Author: Yeah exactly, it has only been for "Subnet Validators". I'm not 100% sure if it should even be capitalized then, but I think it's still consistent to that end

Reviewer 2: I made all mentions of validator lower case in #148

For messages sent from the P-Chain for a given Subnet, only that Subnet's validators must be willing to provide signatures, rather than the entire Primary Network validator set. This optimization is possible because all Subnet Validators will still sync the P-Chain.

The following Warp message payloads are introduced on the P-Chain:

- `SubnetConversionMessage`
- `RegisterSubnetValidatorMessage`
- `SubnetValidatorRegistrationMessage`
- `SubnetValidatorWeightMessage`

The method of requesting signatures for these messages is left unspecified. A viable option for supporting this functionality is laid out in [ACP-118](../118-warp-signature-request/README.md) with the `SignatureRequest` message.

The serialization of each of these messages is as follows.

#### `SubnetConversionMessage`

The `SubnetConversionMessage` is sent from the P-Chain to inform Subnet validator managers of the initial validator set.

The following serialization is defined as a `ValidatorData`:

| Field | Type | Size |
| -: | -: | -: |

> | `nodeID` | `[]byte` | 4 + len(`nodeID`) bytes |

Reviewer: is it worth adding the explanation of why nodeID is variable length

Author: Good call. I added a note above the message specification since it applies to all of the node IDs the messages contain.

- `validators` are the initial pay-as-you-go validators for the given Subnet.

The `SubnetConversionMessage` is specified as an `AddressedCall` with `sourceChainID` set to the P-Chain ID, the `sourceAddress` set to an empty byte array, and a payload of:

| Field | Type | Size |
| -: | -: | -: |
| `codecID` | `uint16` | 2 bytes |
| `typeID` | `uint32` | 4 bytes |
| `subnetConversionID` | `[32]byte` | 32 bytes |
| | | 38 bytes |

- `codecID` is the codec version used to serialize the payload, and is hardcoded to `0x0000`
- `typeID` is the payload type identifier and is `0x00000000` for this message
- `subnetConversionID` is the SHA256 hash of the `SubnetConversionData` from a given `ConvertSubnetTx`

#### `RegisterSubnetValidatorMessage`

The `RegisterSubnetValidatorMessage` is sent from validator managers to the P-Chain to inform the P-Chain of additions to Subnet's validator set.

The following is the serialization of a `PChainOwner`:

| Field | Type | Size |
| -: | -: | -: |
| `threshold` | `uint32` | 4 bytes |

> | `addresses` | `[][20]byte` | 4 + len(`addresses`) * 20 bytes |

Reviewer: can you add explanation of these fields, similar to other messages. I'm wondering what threshold is, and why address is known to be 20 bytes, compared to others that are variable length.

Author: Added. 

All P-Chain addresses are represented as `ids.ShortID`, which are 20 bytes. I left that part out because I don't think it's super relevant here, similar to how we don't explain why BLS signatures are known to be 96 bytes, etc.

| Field | Type | Size |
| -: | -: | -: |
| `codecID` | `uint16` | 2 bytes |
| `typeID` | `uint32` | 4 bytes |
| `subnetID` | `[32]byte` | 32 bytes |
| `nodeID` | `[]byte` | 4 + len(`nodeID`) bytes |
| `blsPublicKey` | `[48]byte` | 48 bytes |
| `expiry` | `uint64` | 8 bytes |
| `remainingBalanceOwner` | `PChainOwner` | 8 + len(`addresses`) * 20 bytes |
| `disableOwner` | `PChainOwner` | 8 + len(`addresses`) * 20 bytes |
| `weight` | `uint64` | 8 bytes |
| | | 122 + len(`nodeID`) + (len(`addresses1`) + len(`addresses2`)) * 20 bytes |

- `codecID` is the codec version used to serialize the payload, and is hardcoded to `0x0000`
- `typeID` is the payload type identifier and is `0x00000001` for this payload
- `subnetID`, `nodeID`, `weight`, and `blsPublicKey` are for the Subnet Validator being added
- `expiry` is the time at which this message becomes invalid. As of a P-Chain timestamp `>= expiry`, this Avalanche Warp Message can no longer be used to add the `nodeID` to the validator set of `subnetID`
- `remainingBalanceOwner` is the P-Chain owner where leftover $AVAX from the Subnet Validator's Balance will be issued to when this validator it is removed from the validator set.

> - `disableOwner` is only the P-Chain owner allowed to disable the validator using `DisableSubnetValidatorTx`, specified below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `disableOwner` is the only P-Chain owner allowed to disable the validator using `DisableSubnetValidatorTx`, specified below.
```

## Specification

> At a high-level, Subnets will now be able to manage their validator sets external to the P-Chain by setting the blockchain ID and address of their "validator manager". This validator manager is able to send Avalanche Warp Messages to the P-Chain in order to modify the validator set registered for the Subnet. In response, the P-Chain will send Avalanche Warp Message back to validator managers to notify them of validator set changes that have taken effect. Subnet Validators will no longer be required to validate the Primary Network, which removes the requirement to stake 2000 $AVAX to be a Subnet Validator. Further, Subnet Validators will only be required to sync the P-Chain (not X/C-Chain) in order to track validator set changes and support cross-Subnet communication. To maintain a Subnet Validator on the P-Chain, a continuous fee must be paid in $AVAX as specified later in this ACP.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At a high-level, Subnets can manage their validator sets externally to the P-Chain by setting the blockchain ID and address of their _validator manager_. The P-Chain will consume Warp messages that modify the Subnet's validator set. To confirm modification of the Subnet's validator set, the P-Chain will also produce Warp messages. Subnet Validators will no longer be required to validate the Primary Network, removing the 2000 $AVAX stake requirement to be a Subnet Validator. In place of this requirement, a continuous fee denominated in $AVAX is introduced to maintain an active Subnet Validator. Subnet Validators are only required to sync the P-Chain (not X/C-Chain) in order to track validator set changes and support cross-Subnet communication.
```

### P-Chain Warp Message Payloads

> To support modifying a Subnet's validator set on the P-Chain via Warp messages, Warp message verification support will be added to the [`PlatformVM`](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/tree/master/vms/platformvm). Similar to Warp messages received by the C-Chain, in order for a Warp message to be considered valid by the P-Chain, at least 67% of the `sourceChainID`'s validator set must have partcipated in the aggregate BLS signature. 

Reviewer 3: I believe it's 67% of the _weight_ rather than the number of validators. I re-worded it a bit to clarify that point and include that this threshold could be modified on a per-Subnet basis in the future.

```suggestion
To enable management of a Subnet's validator set externally to the P-Chain, Warp message verification will be added to the [`PlatformVM`](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/tree/master/vms/platformvm). For a Warp message to be considered valid by the P-Chain, at least 67% of the `sourceChainID`'s weight must have participated in the aggregate BLS signature. This is equivalent to the threshold set for the C-Chain. A future ACP may be proposed to support modification of this threshold on a per-Subnet basis.
```

> For messages sent from the P-Chain for a given Subnet, only that Subnet's validators must be willing to provide signatures, rather than the entire Primary Network validator set. This optimization is possible because all Subnet Validators will still sync the P-Chain.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To verify messages produced by the P-Chain, typically the entire Primary Network's validator set needs to participate in the aggregate BLS signature. However, this can cause a great deal of network bandwidth, increasing latency. An optimization can be made to only require that a quorum of the _Subnet's_ validator set needs to participate in the aggregate BLS signature for messages that are produced by the P-Chain and consumed by the Subnet.
```

| Field | Type | Size |
| -: | -: | -: |
| `codecID` | `uint16` | 2 bytes |
| `typeID` | `uint32` | 4 bytes |
| `subnetConversionID` | `[32]byte` | 32 bytes |
| | | 38 bytes |

- `codecID` is the codec version used to serialize the payload, and is hardcoded to `0x0000`
- `typeID` is the payload type identifier and is `0x00000000` for this message
- `subnetConversionID` is the SHA256 hash of the `SubnetConversionData` from a given `ConvertSubnetTx`

#### `RegisterSubnetValidatorMessage`

The P-Chain can consume a `RegisterSubnetValidatorMessage` from validator managers through a `RegisterSubnetValidatorTx` to register an addition to the Subnet's validator set.

The following is the serialization of a `PChainOwner`:

| Field | Type | Size |
| -: | -: | -: |
| `threshold` | `uint32` | 4 bytes |
| `addresses` | `[][20]byte` | 4 + len(`addresses`) * 20 bytes |
| | | 8 + len(`addresses`) * 20 bytes |

- `threshold` is the number of `addresses` that must provide a signature for the `PChainOwner` to authorize an action.

> - In order to be a valid:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Validation criteria:
```

#### `SubnetValidatorRegistrationMessage`

A `SubnetValidatorRegistrationMessage` is sent from the P-Chain as an acknowledgement to inform validator managers when a validation period has either begun or been invalidated.

The `SubnetValidatorRegistrationMessage` is specified as an `AddressedCall` with `sourceChainID` set to the P-Chain ID, the `sourceAddress` set to an empty byte array, and a payload of:

| Field | Type | Size |
| -: | -: | -: |
| `codecID` | `uint16` | 2 bytes |
| `typeID` | `uint32` | 4 bytes |
| `validationID` | `[32]byte` | 32 bytes |
| `registered` | `bool` | 1 byte  | 
| | | 39 bytes |

- `codecID` is the codec version used to serialize the payload, and is hardcoded to `0x0000`
- `typeID` is the payload type identifier and is `0x00000002` for this message
- `validationID` identifies the validator for the message
- `registered` is a boolean representing the status of the `validationID`. If true, the `validationID` corresponds to a validator in the current validator set. If false, the `validationID` does not correspond to a validator in the current validator set, and never will in the future.

> #### `SubnetValidatorWeightMessage`

Reviewer 4: Why change this from `SubnetValidatorWeightUpdateMessage`? I do believe that the latter makes more sense in regards to `SubnetValidatorRegistrationMessage`.

Author: The thinking was that this message format is also used for messages from the P-Chain back to the L1, and the P-Chain is only ever willing to sign for the latest validator weight and nonce, as opposed to signing for each individual weight update.

Reviewer 4: Makes sense!

- `typeID` is the payload type identifier and is `0x00000003` for this message
- `validationID` identifies the validator for the message
- `nonce` is a strictly increasing number that denotes the latest validator weight update and provides replay protection for this transaction
- `weight` is the new `weight` of the validator

### New P-Chain Transaction Types

Both before and after this ACP, to create a Subnet, a `CreateSubnetTx` must be issued on the P-Chain. This transaction includes an `Owner` field which defines the key that today can be used to authorize any validator set additions (`AddSubnetValidatorTx`) or removals (`RemoveSubnetValidatorTx`). 

To be a Permissionless Subnet:
- This `Owner` key must no longer have the ability to modify the Subnet's validator set
- New transaction types must support modification of a Subnet's validator set via Warp messages.

The following new transaction types are introduced on the P-Chain to support this functionality.
- `ConvertSubnetTx`
- `RegisterSubnetValidatorTx`
- `SetSubnetValidatorWeightTx`
- `DisableSubnetValidatorTx`
- `IncreaseSubnetValidatorWeightTx`

#### `ConvertSubnetTx`

> After a `CreateSubnetTx` is issued, a `ConvertSubnetTx` may be issued by the `Owner` to explicitly convert a Subnet from permissioned to permissionless. This transaction will set the `(chainID, address)` pair that will manage the Subnet's validator set going forward.

Reviewer 3: Re-worded a bit to put the state transition prior to the validation criteria

```suggestion
To convert a Subnet from permissioned to permissionless, a `ConvertSubnetTx` must be issued to set the `(chainID, address)` pair that will manage the Subnet's validator set going forward. The `Owner` key defined in `CreateSubnetTx` must provide a signature to authorize this conversion.
```

The `ConvertSubnetTx` specification is:

```golang
type PChainOwner struct {
    // The threshold number of `Addresses` that must provide a signature in order for
    // the `PChainOwner` to be considered valid.
    Threshold uint32 `json:"threshold"`
    // The 20-byte addresses that are allowed to sign to authenticate a `PChainOwner`.
    // Note: It is required for:
    //       - len(Addresses) == 0 if `Threshold` is 0.
    //       - len(Addresses) >= `Threshold`
    //       - The values in Addresses to be sorted in ascending order.
    Addresses []ids.ShortID `json:"addresses"`
}

type SubnetValidator struct {
    // NodeID of this validator

>     NodeID ids.NodeID `json:"nodeID"`

Reviewer 5: Should this also be a variable length nodeID?

Author: I guess that would make future upgrades to support new node ID types less disruptive? Makes sense to me.

```golang
type RegisterSubnetValidatorTx struct {
    // Metadata, inputs and outputs
    BaseTx
    // Balance <= sum($AVAX inputs) - sum($AVAX outputs) - TxFee.
    Balance uint64 `json:"balance"`
    // [Signer] is a BLS signature proving ownership of the BLS public key specified
    // below in `Message` for this validator.
    // Note: We do not enforce that the BLS key is unique across all validators.
    //       This means that validators can share a key if they so choose.
    //       However, a NodeID does uniquely map to a BLS key
    Signer [96]byte `json:"signer"`
    // A RegisterSubnetValidatorMessage payload
    Message warp.Message `json:"message"`
}
```

The `validationID` of validators added via `RegisterSubnetValidatorTx` is defined as the SHA256 hash of the `Payload` of the `AddressedCall` in `Message`.

When a `RegisterSubnetValidatorTx` is accepted on the P-Chain, the Subnet Validator is added to the Subnet's validator set. A `minNonce` field corresponding to the `validationID` will be stored on addition to the validator set (initially set to `0`). This field will be used when validating the `SetSubnetValidatorWeightTx` defined below.

> This `validationID` will be used for replay protection. Used `validationID`s will be stored on the P-Chain. If a `RegisterSubnetValidatorTx`'s `validationID` has already been used, the transaction will be considered invalid. To prevent storing an unbounded number of `validationID`s, the `expiry` of the `RegisterSubnetValidatorMessage` is required to be no more than 48 hours in the future of the time the transaction is issued on the P-Chain. Any `validationIDs` corresponding to an expired timestamp can be flushed from the P-Chain's state.

Reviewer 5: 48h is likely too much. Currently avalanchego has it set to 24h, it might need to be even smaller.

Author: Totally defer to whatever you think is safe from a P-Chain perspective. 

UX wise, I think as low as 30 minutes is sufficient.

Note that this does not modify a Subnet's total staking weight. This transaction only marks the Subnet Validator as inactive but does not remove it from the Subnet's validator set. Inactive Subnet Validators can re-activate at any time by increasing their balance with an `IncreaseBalanceTx`.
#### `DisableSubnetValidatorTx`

Subnet creators should be aware that there is no notion of `MinStakeDuration` that is enforced by the P-Chain. It is expected that Subnets who choose to enforce a `MinStakeDuration` will lock the validator's Stake for the Subnet's desired `MinStakeDuration`.
Subnet Validators can use `DisableSubnetValidatorTx` to mark their validator as inactive. The specification for this transaction is:

```golang
type DisableValidatorTx struct {
type DisableSubnetValidatorTx struct {
    // Metadata, inputs and outputs
    BaseTx
    // ID corresponding to the validator
    ValidationID ids.ID `json:"validationID"`
    // Ed25519 Signature on [TxID]

>     Signature []byte `json:"signature"`

Reviewer 5: Now that this can be a multi-sig, we need to add a `DisableAuth verify.Verifiable` here.

Author: Thank for calling that out. Added now

After a `RegisterSubnetValidatorTx` is accepted, the P-Chain must be willing to sign a `SubnetValidatorRegistrationMessage` for the given `validationID` with `registered` set to `true`. This remains the case until the time at which the Subnet Validator is removed from the validator set using a `SetSubnetValidatorWeightTx`, as described below. 

When it is known that a given `validationID` *is not and never will be* an existing validation period for a Subnet, the P-Chain must be willing to sign a `SubnetValidatorRegistrationMessage` for the `validationID` with `registered` set to `false`. This could be the case if the `expiry` time of the message has passed prior to the message being delivered in a `RegisterSubnetValidatorTx`, or if the Subnet Validator was successfully registered and then later removed. This enables the P-Chain to prove to validator managers that a validator has been removed or never added. The P-Chain must refuse to sign any `SubnetValidatorRegistrationMessage` where the `validationID` does not correspond to an active validator and the `expiry` is in the future.

#### `SetSubnetValidatorWeightTx`

> `SetSubnetValidatorWeightTx` is used to modify the voting weight of a Subnet Validator. The specifcation of this transaction is:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
`SetSubnetValidatorWeightTx` is used to modify the voting weight of a Subnet Validator. The specfication of this transaction is:
```

Author: Think we both had typos here...correcting now

```golang
type SetSubnetValidatorWeightTx struct {
    // Metadata, inputs and outputs
    BaseTx

>     // A SubnetValidatorWeightMessage payload

Reviewer 3: This pattern is a _lot_ clearer than it was in the original spec. Thanks for taking the time to cleanup ❤️

Author: 🫡

#### `DisableSubnetValidatorTx`

Subnet Validators can use `DisableSubnetValidatorTx` to mark their validator as inactive. The specification for this transaction is:

```golang
type DisableSubnetValidatorTx struct {
    // Metadata, inputs and outputs
    BaseTx
    // ID corresponding to the validator
    ValidationID ids.ID `json:"validationID"`
    // Authorizes this validator to be disabled
    DisableAuth verify.Verifiable `json:"disableAuthorization"`
}
```

> There is no requirement of any interaction on the Subnet to issue this transaction. For this transaction to be valid, a signature from the `DisableOwner` specified for this validator in its `RegisterSubnetValidatorTx`. Any remaining $AVAX in the Subnet Validator's `Balance` will be issued to the `RemaningBalanceOwner` defined when this validator was added to the validator set.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
There is no requirement of any interaction on the Subnet to issue this transaction. For this transaction to be valid, a signature from the `DisableOwner` specified for this validator in its `RegisterSubnetValidatorTx`. Any remaining $AVAX in the Subnet Validator's `Balance` will be issued to the `RemainingBalanceOwner` defined when this validator was added to the validator set.
```

> There is no requirement of any interaction on the Subnet to issue this transaction. For this transaction to be valid, a signature from the `DisableOwner` specified for this validator in its `RegisterSubnetValidatorTx`. Any remaining $AVAX in the Subnet Validator's `Balance` will be issued to the `RemainingBalanceOwner` defined when this validator was added to the validator set.

Reviewer 3: I think we can skip saying "there isn't any interaction on the Subnet" here since we mention it below

```suggestion
The `DisableOwner` specified for this validator must sign the transaction. Any unspent $AVAX in the Subnet Validator's `Balance` will be issued in a single UTXO to the `RemainingBalanceOwner` for this validator. Recall that both `DisableOwner` and `RemainingBalanceOwner` are specified when the validator is first added to the Subnet's validator set (in either `ConvertSubnetTx` or `RegisterSubnetValidatorTx`).
```

> The expected path for full removal from a Subnet's validator set is via a `SetSubnetValidatorWeightTx` with weight `0` which requires a Warp message produced by the Subnet. However, the ability to reclaim the balance allotted to a validator without authorization from the Subnet is critical for failed Subnets.

Reviewer 3: "The expected path" language suggests that this transaction is a full removal, cleaned that up a bit

```suggestion
For full removal from a Subnet's validator set, a `SetSubnetValidatorWeightTx`  must be issued with weight `0`. To do so, a Warp message is required from the Subnet's manager. However, to support the ability to claim the unspent `Balance` for a Subnet Validator without authorization is critical for failed Subnets.
```

> For full removal from a Subnet's validator set, a `SetSubnetValidatorWeightTx`  must be issued with weight `0`. To do so, a Warp message is required from the Subnet's manager. However, to support the ability to claim the unspent `Balance` for a Subnet Validator without authorization is critical for failed Subnets.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For full removal from a Subnet's validator set, a `SetSubnetValidatorWeightTx` must be issued with weight `0`. To do so, a Warp message is required from the Subnet's manager. However, to support the ability to claim the unspent `Balance` for a Subnet Validator without authorization is critical for failed Subnets.
```

Note that this does not modify a Subnet's total staking weight. This transaction marks the Subnet Validator as inactive, but does not remove it from the Subnet's validator set. Inactive Subnet Validators can re-activate at any time by increasing their balance with an `IncreaseSubnetValidatorWeightTx`.

Subnet creators should be aware that there is no notion of `MinStakeDuration` that is enforced by the P-Chain. It is expected that Subnets who choose to enforce a `MinStakeDuration` will lock the validator's Stake for the Subnet's desired `MinStakeDuration`.

> #### `IncreaseSubnetValidatorWeightTx`

Reviewer 3: Why was this transaction renamed from `IncreaseBalanceTx` to `IncreaseSubnetValidatorWeightTx`? Does it increase the weight of the validator now?

Author: Yikes, no this was a typo. Thanks for catching it, should be `IncreaseSubnetValidatorBalanceTx`, to be consistent with the transaction naming of the other new transactions for managing subnet validators.

> Subnet Validators are required to maintain a non-zero balance used to pay the continuous fee on the P-Chain in order to be considered active. The `IncreaseSubnetValidatorWeightTx` can be used by anybody to add additional $AVAX to the `Balance` to a Subnet Validator. The specification for this transaction is:

Reviewer 3: nit of all nits: can we standardize either `The specification *for* this transaction is` or `The specification *of* this transaction is`? we use each twice in this PR currently

To bootstrap a node/validator, a few critical questions must be answered: How does one discover peers in the network? How does one determine that a discovered peer is honestly participating in the network?

For standalone networks like the Avalanche Primary Network, this is done by connecting to a hardcoded [set](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/genesis/bootstrappers.json) of trusted bootstrappers to then discover new peers. Ethereum calls their set [bootnodes](https://ethereum.org/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/bootnodes).

By separating Subnet Validators from Primary Network Validators, a list of validator IPs to connect to (the functional bootstrappers of the Subnet) is no longer provided by simply connecting to the Primary Network Validators. However, the Primary Network can enable nodes tracking a Subnet to seamlessly connect to the Subnet Validators by tracking and gossiping Subnet Validator IPs. Subnets will not need to operate and maintain a set of bootstrappers and can continue to rely on the Primary Network for peer discovery.

### Sidebar: Subnet Sovereignty

> After this ACP is activated, the P-Chain will no longer support staking of any assets other than $AVAX for the Primary Network. The P-Chain will no longer support distribution of staking rewards for Subnets. All staking-related operations for Subnet Validation must be managed by the Subnet's validator manager. The P-Chain simply requires a continuous fee per Subnet Validator. If a Subnet would like to manage their Validator's balances on the P-Chain, it can cover the cost for all Subnet Validators by posting the $AVAX balance on the P-Chain. Subnets can implement any mechanism they want to pay the continuous fee charged by the P-Chain for its participants.

Reviewer 3: great catch
